# Early system

- OS was a set of routines (a library) that sat in memory.
- There would be 1 running program that currently sat in memory and used the rest of memory.

# Multiprogramming and Time Sharing

- **multiprogramming**: multiple processes were ready to run at a given time and the OS would switch between them.
- **timesharing**:
  - **approach 1**: run 1 process for a short while, giving it access to all memory, then stop it, save all of its state to disk, load some other process states, then repeat.
    - **problem:** saving/loading the entire content of memory to/from disk is too non-performant.
  - **approach 2**: leave processes in memory while switching
    - **protection**: 1 process should not be able to read/write some other process's memory

# Address space

- **Concepts**:
  - An easy-to-use abstraction of physical memory, created by the OS.
  - The running program's view of memory in the system.
- The address space of a process contains all of the memory state:
  - **code** (instructions)
  - **stack**: for function calls, local variables
  - **heap**: for dynamically-allocated, user-managed memory
  - ...
- Example **placement**:
  - code: top of the address space
  - heap: grow downward (low address -> high address)
  - stack: grow upward (high address -> low address)
- **Memory virtualization**: the process uses **virtual address**, the OS (with hardware support) translates to **physical address**

# Goals

- **Transparency**:
  - program shouldn't be aware that memory is virtualized.
  - program behave as if it has its own private physical memory.
- **Efficiency**:
  - time: not making programs run much more slowly.
  - space: not using too much memory for structures needed.
  - rely on hardware support: features like TLBs.
- **Protection**:
  - protect processes from one another as well as the OS itself.
