# Key terms

- CPU should support at least 2 modes of execution: restricted **user mode** and privileged (non-restricted) **kernel mode**.
- User applications typically run in user mode, and use a **system call** to **trap** into the kernel to request OS services.
- The **trap** instruction saves register state, changes hardware status to kernel mode, and jumps into the OS to a pre-specified destination - the **trap table**.
- When the OS finishes servicing a system call, it returns to user program via the **return-from-trap** instruction, which reduces privilege and returns control to the instruction after the trap that jumped into the OS.
- The **trap tables** must be setup by the OS at boot time, and cannot be modified by user programs. This is part of the **limited direct execution (LDE)** protocol which runs programs efficiently without loss of OS control.
- Once a program is running, the OS must use hardware mechanisms to ensure user program does not run forever - the **timer interrupt**. This is a **non-cooperative** approach to CPU scheduling.
- Sometimes during a timer interrupt or system call, the OS might switch from running the current process to a different one - the **context switch** technique.

# Details

- "Direct execution" part:
  - Run the program directly on the CPU.
  - To run a program: OS creates a process entry in process list, allocates memory, loads program code from disk to memory, locates entry point _(`main()` routine or something similar)_, jumps to it, and starts running user's code.
- When the machine **boots up**, it does so **in privileged (kernel) mode**, and thus is free to configure machine hardware.
  - 1 thing is to setup the **trap table** _(which code to run when system calls and other exceptional events occur)_.
- A **system-call number** is assigned to each system call.
  - User code place this number at a location required by the OS.
  - **protection**: user code cannot specify an exact address to jump to.
- **Regain control - Cooperative approach**:
  - Wait for currently running process to make system calls.
  - What if the process doesn't make system calls, or get stuck in an infinite loop: **reboot**
- **Regain control - Non-cooperative approach - Timer interrupt**:
  - When an interrupt is raised, the currently running process is halted, the OS regains control of the CPU and may switch to run a different process.
  - At boot time: the OS configures interrupt handler + start the timer (privileged operation).
  - The timer can be turned off (privileged operation).
- **Context switching**: the OS executes some assembly code to save general purpose registers, PC, kernel stack pointer of the currently-running process, then restore registers, PC, and switch to the kernel stack for the to-be-execute process.
