# Multi-level feedback queue (MLFQ)

## Fundamental problem

- How to design a scheduler that both minimizes response time for interactive jobs while also minimizing turnaround time without a priori knowledge of job length?

## Basic idea

- Maintain multiple queues, each with a different priority level.
- At any given time, choose the job with highest priority to run.
- Vary the priority of a job based on its observed behavior (feedback).

## Rules

1. If priority(A) > priority(B), A runs (B doesn't).
2. If priority(A) == priority(B), A and B run in Round-Robin fashion using the time slice (quantum length) of a given queue.
3. When a job enters the system, it is placed at the highest priority (the topmost queue).
4. Once a job uses up its **time allotment** at a given level (total time, not reset when the job "gives up" CPU), its priority is reduced (it moves down 1 queue).
5. After some time period S, move all jobs in the system to the topmost queue (priority boost).

## Tuning

- **Examples:**
  - how many queues should there be?
  - how big should the time slice / allotment be per queue?
  - how often should priority be boosted (avoid starvation and account for changes in behavior)?
- **Implementation examples:**
  - allow varying time-slice length across different queues: high-priority queues are given shorter time slices (interactive jobs); low-priority queue are given longer time slices (long-running CPU-bound jobs).
  - allow admin configuration with a set of tables.
  - allow user **advice** to help set priorities: command-line utility `nice`.
  - adjust priorities using mathematical formulas.
  - some schedulers reserve the highest priority levels for OS work.

# Rules build-up

## Basic rules

- **Rules:**
  - (1) If priority(A) > priority(B), A runs (B doesn't).
  - (2) If priority(A) == priority(B), A and B run in Round-Robin fashion.
- **Problems:**
  - The system may just alternate between jobs in highest priority queue;jobs in low priority queue may never get to run.

## Attempt #1: how to change priority

- Job's **allotment**: the amount of time a job can spend at a given priority level before the scheduler reduces its priority
- **Rules:**
  - (3) When a job enters the system, it is placed at the highest priority.
  - (4a) If a job uses up its allotment while running, its priority is reduced.
  - (4b) If a job gives up the CPU (for example, by performing an I/O operations), before the allotment is up, it stays at the same priority level (its allotment is reset).
- **Problems:**
  - **Starvation:** If there are too many interactive jobs in the system, they will combine to consume all CPU time -> long-running jobs never receive any CPU time.
  - **Game the scheduler:** Before the allotment is used, issue an I/O operation and thus relinquish the CPU -> the allotment is reset and the job remain in the same queue.
  - **Behavior change:** What was CPU-bound may transition to be interactive, which need higher priority -> current setup only reduces priority.

## Attempt #2: priority boost

- **Rules:**
  - After some time period S, move all jobs in the system to the topmost queue
- **Solved:**
  - Processes are guaranteed not to starved.
  - If a CPU-bound job has become interactive, it is treated properly after the priority boost.

## Attempt #3: better accounting

- **Rules:**
  - (4) Once a job uses up its **time allotment** at a given level (total time, not reset when the job "gives up" CPU), its priority is reduced (it moves down 1 queue).
- **Solved:**
  - Prevent gaming the scheduler.
