- **Proportional-share** scheduler (or **fair-share** scheduler): try to guarantee that each job obtain a certain percentage of CPU time.

# Lottery scheduling

- **Tickets**: represent the share of a resource that a process (or user) should receive.
- Processes that should run more often should be given more changes to win the lottery.
- The scheduler achieves this **probabilistically** by holding a lottery to determine which process should get to run next.

## Holding a lottery

- total number of tickets is known in advance.
- each process is assigned a range.
- picks a winning ticket **randomly** in range [0..total-1].
- choose the process whose tickets range contains winning ticket.
- **Note:** when a process finishes, total number of tickets and tickets range of remaining processes must be **recalculated**.

## Ticket mechanisms

- **Ticket currency**:
  - allow a user with a set of tickets to allocate tickets among their own jobs in whatever currency they would like
  - the system automatically converts said currency into correct global value.
- **Ticket transfer**:
  - a process can temporarily hand off its tickets to another process
  - especially useful in client/server setting:
    - client process sends request to server.
    - to speed up the work, client can pass tickets to server.
    - when finished, server transfers tickets back to client.
- **Ticket inflation**:
  - a process can temporarily raise or lower the number of tickets it owns.
  - applied in environments where a group of processes **trust** one another.

## Fairness metric (F)

- Study completion time of 2 jobs competing against one another.
- F is the time the 1st job completes divided by the time the 2nd job completes.

# Stride scheduling

- A **deterministic** fair-share scheduler

## How it works

- each job is given a **stride**, which is inverse in proportion to the number of tickets it has.
- every time a process run, increment a counter for it (called its **pass** value) by its stride.
- at any given time, pick the process that has the lowest **pass** value to run.

## Pseudocode

```c
curr = remove_min(queue);   // pick client with min pass
schedule(curr);             // run for quantum
curr->pass += curr->stride; // update pass using stride
insert(queue, curr);        // return curr to queue
```

## Drawback

- If a new job enters, and we set its **pass** value to 0, it will monopolize the CPU.

# Linux Completely Fair Scheduler (CFS)

## Basic operations

- **virtual runtime** (`vruntime`):
  - as each process runs, it accumulates `vruntime`
  - basic case: each process's `vruntime` increases at the same rate, in proportion with **physical time**
  - when a scheduling decision occurs, CFS pick the process with the lowest `vruntime` to run next.
- `sched_latency`:
  - determine how long a process should run before considering a switch
  - CFS divides this value by the number of running processes to determine the time slice for a process: `time_slice = sched_latency / n`
- `min_granularity`:
  - CFS never set the time slice of a process to less than this value.
- CFS utilizes a periodic timer interrupt (that goes off frequently) -> can only make decisions at fixed time intervals.

## Weighting (Niceness)

- CFS enables controls over process priority through a UNIX mechanism: the **nice** level of a process.
  - **nice** parameter can be set from -20 to 19, default to 0.
  - positive values imply lower priority.
  - negative values imply higher priority.
- CFS maps the nice value of each process to a **weight**:

```c
static const int prio_to_weight[40] = {
/* -20 */ 88761, 71755, 56483, 46273, 36291,
/* -15 */ 29154, 23254, 18705, 14949, 11916,
/* -10 */ 9548, 7620, 6100, 4904, 3906,
/* -5 */ 3121, 2501, 1991, 1586, 1277,
/* 0 */ 1024, 820, 655, 526, 423,
/* 5 */ 335, 272, 215, 172, 137,
/* 10 */ 110, 87, 70, 56, 45,
/* 15 */ 36, 29, 23, 18, 15,
};
```

- **time slice** with priority:

```
time_slice_k = (weight_k * total_weight) / sched_latency
. total_weight = sum(weight_i for i in [0..n-1])
```

- `vruntime` with priority:

```
vruntime_i = vruntime_i + (weight_0 / weight_i) * runtime_i
. runtime_i: actual runtime process i has accrued
. weight_0 = 1024

higher priority -> lower niceness (higher weight) -> vruntime accumulates at lower rate
```

## Using red-black tree

- **Problem**: linear searching through a long list is wasteful
  - the scheduler needs to find the next job to run every so many milliseconds
  - modern system sometimes are comprised of 1000s of processes
- **Solution**: keep processes in a **red-black tree**
  - a simple binary tree can degenerate to linked-list under worst-case insertion patterns.
  - **balanced tree** do a little extra work to maintain low depth, ensure that operations are **logarithmic** in time.
- CFS only keeps running processes in the RB tree. If a process goes to sleep _(say, waiting for I/O to complete)_, it is removed from the tree and kept track of elsewhere.

## Dealing with I/O and sleeping processes

- **Problem**: Imagine 2 process (A and B): A runs continuously, B has gone to sleep for a long period of time. When B wakes up, its `vruntime` is far behind, and thus will monopolize the CPU while it catches up, effectively starving A.
- CFS handles this by **altering** `vruntime` of a job when it wakes up: set to the minimum value found in the tree of running processes.
- **Pros**: avoid starvation
- **Cons**: jobs that sleep for short periods of time frequently don't get their fair share of the CPU.

# Summary

- **Remaining problems**:
  - don't mesh well with I/O
  - decide priority (how many tickets to assigned? what nice value to set?)
- Other general-purpose scheduler (such as **MLFQ**) handle these issues automatically and may be easily deployed.
- Still great for domains where these problems are not a concern: like **virtualized** data center (**cloud**).
